Michael Franz: Hi everybody. So here we are in week three, and we are talking about identity crisis about the 2016 presidential election, both the primary phase and the general election phase and this week we're going to talk about the primary election phase.
Michael Franz: Today I want to talk to a little bit about the Republican side, and on
Michael Franz: The next lecture to we'll talk about the democratic side, there are a lot of themes that run throughout this book that we're going to talk about over the course of the next two weeks.
Michael Franz: And in particular, a lot of the themes that are of interest include really deep discussions about the role that certain voter attitudes had
Michael Franz: On how voters voted in both the primaries and 2016 and in the general election that year. And so I want to spend a lot of time hearing from you.
Michael Franz: About what you thought about various pieces of evidence in the book, they use a lot of different survey data and they analyze the attitudes, the way attitudes about
Michael Franz: racial attitudes attitudes about gender equality attitudes about the economy, whether all those attitudes influence the
Michael Franz: Way candidate. The way voters voted in the primary in general election. And one of the things they're very sensitive about and they're very careful to take note of is
Michael Franz: The, the, the challenge of pulling apart the influence of those types of attitudes on voter behavior. In other words, if
Michael Franz: If I asked people who they voted for it. And I also at the same time, ask them their views and attitudes on
Michael Franz: Immigration or racial equality or racial justice police brutality, it may be the case that the election.
Michael Franz: itself has activated those issues for me. And so my attitude or beliefs on those issues and how I voted.
Michael Franz: Kind of are so intricately tied together. That's not really clear what caused what perhaps I voted for Donald Trump and 2016 because he told me immigration was really important issue.
Michael Franz: And I came to believe immigration was a really important issue. And so it wouldn't be quite right to say that immigration.
Michael Franz: caused me to vote for Donald Trump as much as Donald Trump caused me to think immigration was important.
Michael Franz: Which is one of the reasons why I justified my vote for Donald Trump. And so the cause and effect relationship between attitudes is really, really hard to tease out
Michael Franz: And they're very careful to try at careful to recognize that and they're careful to know when they have solid data that allows them to know cause versus correlation and
Michael Franz: One way they do that is by using a panel study of voters that express attitudes on issues of immigration race economy way before the 2016 election and then those
Michael Franz: Panel respondents were interviewed again during the 2016 election and so their attitudes four or five years before the campaign.
Michael Franz: Are used to predict their behavior and their voting patterns in the 26 campaign 2016 campaign. And so it allows us to see to say more confidently that those attitudes on race or
Michael Franz: Racial Justice or gender or having a pre determined a pre RI effect on how voters voted in 2016 because those attitudes were measured way before the campaign started
Michael Franz: So it's those kinds of things that I find fascinating. And then I want us to to acknowledge is important in understanding the way
Michael Franz: All of these things play out and understanding the impact that they had on voters attitudes.
Michael Franz: But there's so much to cover and so I'm excited to talk to you about anything that you find interesting in these chapters.
Michael Franz: So in this lecture and in the lecture on the second part of the week. I want to focus on a couple of core concepts and ideas that I think are interesting and important and will allow us to
Michael Franz: To kind of, you know, talk about those. If we like. But then focus on other things in the discussion, whatever we really want. However, we really want this.
Michael Franz: To go. And so the first thing I want to talk about is is turnout. Now the book doesn't say much about turnout. But it's important to look at the 2016 primary phase.
Michael Franz: And turnout in that primary phase and we can compare it to what we know about turnout in in 2020. And so let me just
Michael Franz: Share this screen up here and you'll see that in the priming activity for the the week.
Michael Franz: I asked you, or send them. One of the things you could do is to go and look at turnout rates in the general and primary election and this comes from a website.
Michael Franz: Run by political scientist named Michael McDonald who collects as much data as you can about the presidential and congressional primary phase and
Michael Franz: Especially on turnout rates and he has for His data up here. Now what's interesting, first is to look at turnout rates in national midterm and presidential general elections.
Michael Franz: And we have really pretty decent data on measuring turnout rates in these election campaigns going all the way back to the beginning of the Republic.
Michael Franz: And so, you know, it's always a nice graph to see something like 1789 to 2018 that's pretty pretty neat and comprehensive set of data.
Michael Franz: And you can see that there has been a couple of different phases of turnout in American politics and the early period there really wasn't a lot of
Michael Franz: Voting and that coincides or turn out, I should say. And that coincides with a lecture from last week about the evolution electoral college in the early republic. We didn't have
Michael Franz: A whole bunch of democratic institutions firmly in place. And so the people that could vote oftentimes didn't vote, and there was. It was a very much an elite level democracy, but as
Michael Franz: We moved into the 1830s, as seen through the evolution of the electoral college
Michael Franz: You can see also the evolution of a mass democracy movement in this graph were turnout in the 1830s in mid Turner presidential elections starts to skyrocket.
Michael Franz: Now remember the, the denominator in this, or at least you should know the denominator here is voting eligible population.
Michael Franz: And the voting eligible population in 1836 was fairly small. It was landed, or at least as we moved into the 1830s free white men and
Michael Franz: It didn't include enslaved African immigrants or freed American, African Americans. It didn't include women. And so the voting eligible population was a lot smaller than it is today.
Michael Franz: Even as a you know relative measure and so turnout rates were high amongst them, but there were lots of people who aren't allowed to vote. So that's important to keep in mind.
Michael Franz: But over the course of the second half of the 1800s turnout in midterm elections always lags a little behind presidential elections, except in the early period when presenting elections were not really decided by the popular vote.
Michael Franz: Presidential elections, we're seeing turnout rates in 1850 6070s and 80s and ready percent which is extremely high.
Michael Franz: And then you move into the 1900s and we started to expand access to the ballot and at the same time, if you recall from Chapter three in the textbook.
Michael Franz: We also started to see weekend political parties party organizations were really good at at at
Michael Franz: Dragging people to the polls AND GETTING THEIR SIDE TO TURN OUT AND VOTE. And as party organizations weekend in the early part of the 20th century and the progressive movement came to see parties with some suspicion turnout.
Michael Franz: Declined and turn out declined into the 1920s and sort of stabilized and presidential elections, from about 1924 all the way up to 2016
Michael Franz: Into this somewhere bouncing around 50 to 60% sometimes you see turn a little bit higher than 60% but bouncing around here.
Michael Franz: pretty consistently in that 10 point range, way lower than it was before and after the Civil War, but a lot higher than it was in the early years.
Michael Franz: Midterm elections are also bouncing around a little bit more variance here but bouncing around. If you put a trend line through here, maybe, somewhere around 40% of the eligible voters TURN OUT AND VOTE midterm elections.
Michael Franz: Which is pretty bad. And in fact, in 2014 we saw turnout rates that if you drew a line over here was about as low as we've had it in about 100 years
Michael Franz: But things turned around pretty fast, because in 2018 we saw turnout in the midterm race of 2018 that was about higher than anything we've seen in over 100 years. And so the variants and midterm elections can can be quite big, but it always below the presidential turnout rate.
Michael Franz: And so if you keep in mind the fact that presidential elections see turnout rates of around 55% let's say and midterm election see turnout rates of
Michael Franz: Around 42 42% that's interesting context for us because one of the things McDonald does is also tell us the turnout rates in states for presidential primaries in and sometimes for caucuses, but mostly for primers.
Michael Franz: And so I want to start by looking at 2016 and you can click on this and you'll get a turnout sheet.
Michael Franz: That if I just kind of open the spreadsheet here kind of widen it for us. And it shows us I think a couple things that are misleading.
Michael Franz: But they're important to note, they're not misleading in a bad way. They're just important context pieces to remember
Michael Franz: And that's what you're going to see here in column E. The turnout in primaries and caucuses and presidential races. And so in Iowa in
Michael Franz: 2016 when the most important contests in the presidential phase of the nomination battle and in a year where you had competitive Iowa caucus.
Michael Franz: For the both the democrats and the republicans turn up in the caucus was about 16% of eligible voters.
Michael Franz: Which is pretty bad. Right. But we have to keep in mind that caucuses are run by the parties and oftentimes in primaries and caucuses, depending on whether it's an open primary state or a closed primary state, you might not be able to vote in the primary if you're an independent
Michael Franz: And so you're an eligible voter, but you're essentially blocked from voting. And so it's important that I don't have that here in this table.
Michael Franz: It's important to look up whether or not a state is an open state open primary state or closed primary state, maybe we would see turnout hire an open primary states were independence can pick to vote in a primary if they want to.
Michael Franz: But Michael McDonald doesn't scale for that and it's important because that's an important thing to keep in mind that there are lots of independence, who don't vote in the primary phase of the Democratic and Republican presidential primaries.
Michael Franz: Or caucuses. There's still eligible voters and if they joined parties, they could vote. And so the turnout rate is perhaps rightly understood it as the number of ballots cast in the primaries and caucuses.
Michael Franz: Divided by the number of eligible voters in the state. And so he shows us the number of eligible voters in the state here in column f
Michael Franz: Is for people who are over the age of 18 citizens who have not been disenfranchised by state laws around felonies or prison convictions.
Michael Franz: So the number of eligible voters as best as we can count them in each cycle.
Michael Franz: And then we have the number of total balance cast, both in the democratic a primary will the Republican primary caucus, he added these two together and we can get a turnout rate.
Michael Franz: And if you scroll down here, you'll see that across all of the caucuses and the primaries, for which we have data. And there are some
Michael Franz: States, where we don't have data and you'll see a lot of empty blanks here for caucuses, because those numbers are not
Michael Franz: Oftentimes reported up very accurately to the state level, the parties, hold on to them to figure out who won.
Michael Franz: A caucus, but they may not report those numbers out to the Secretary of State, but in primaries, which are generally run by the state's themselves.
Michael Franz: We have good numbers of balance cast and so most of these cells will see primary turnout numbers and they're always they're always low, they're always extremely low and they're very they're oftentimes lower than the than
Michael Franz: The turnout rate in the midterm election we always bemoan the turnout in the midterm election is around 40% well you see some states like the state Arizona.
Michael Franz: Which in March of 2016 how the Democratic and Republican primary return was of 24% of eligible voters, so three quarters of voters in the state of Arizona did not cast a ballot in the march 22 2016
Michael Franz: presidential primary state of Wisconsin sees a turnout rate that's about 50% it's always very high very civically active state.
Michael Franz: But many states don't see anything close to that mid 30s HIGH 30s is about as good as you get in many of these states.
Michael Franz: And so the primaries are not a place of vigorous political activity, they're important to deciding who wins the nomination, but many people sit out
Michael Franz: Or not able to vote because of their status as an independent in a closed primary state and I say not able to vote because they could vote if they join one of the two parties, but they just, they just don't want to.
Michael Franz: Hear you can see the effect of New Hampshire as an important early primary state over half the eligible voters in New Hampshire voted in 2016 but about half not
Michael Franz: Now we can go to, because we have updated 2020 numbers as well. And one of the interesting things with this book is to compare 2016 with 2020 and 2020 numbers are right here. Now, the difference between 2020 and 2016 is that we didn't really have
Michael Franz: A Republican that we had mostly a democratic nomination campaign and so turnout rates are going to be lower in
Michael Franz: 2020 than they are in 2016 because lots of Republicans did not turn out to vote on the primary or caucus DAY BECAUSE TRUMP DIDN'T HAVE ANY MAJOR competition, he was running against some
Michael Franz: You know token opposition bill. Well, the former governor of Massachusetts was running for the nomination, but none of them had any traction so you don't see a lot of turnout.
Michael Franz: Amongst republicans but I want to make a few exceptions to that general point. So you can see here turnout rate in in Iowa in 2020 was 9% of eligible voters. It's down 10% from where it was in 2016 in New Hampshire, you see a state like Colorado, which has
Michael Franz: Fairly high turnout in 2020 but a lot of states here in the 20th and
Michael Franz: And lower one state to look at his state of Wisconsin which held a primary held its primary in
Michael Franz: In April of 2020 during the midst of mostly a shutdown in the early part of the pandemic was kind of a controversy to hold the primary in person primary
Michael Franz: At that time, and many states for pushing off their primaries and Wisconsin held it and it had a turnout rate of about 36%. But again, a lot of that can also be driven by the
Michael Franz: The lack of a republican
Michael Franz: Campaign still 35% is quite a high number, given the context of coven 19 at the time, and there were 4.5 million balance cast for the or I should say there were sorry there were about 1 million balance cast for the Democratic side of the ticket.
Michael Franz: Um, interestingly enough.
Michael Franz: Many of these ballots, which we don't have counted here may have been early balancer absentee ballots. And so, those don't get reflected those get reflected in the totals. But we're not able to piece them out.
Michael Franz: But Wisconsin did have an in person primary and in 2020 and addition to its absentee component, but it wasn't all male on male balancing
Michael Franz: Then the other thing I wanted to point out is it. What's interesting is that you have in columns H and I hear
Michael Franz: You have the number of ballots cast in the Democratic primary caucus and you have the number of balance cast in the Republican primary or caucus.
Michael Franz: But of course, as I mentioned, there were not there were, there was no real opposition to Trump was facing. So what's interesting is to look at the number of people who nonetheless showed up to vote for Trump.
Michael Franz: On a on a ballot that contains no real threat to him, and you can still see here that there's many people in the State of Alabama, for example, 720 2000 alabamans
Michael Franz: Turned out on March 3 to vote for Trump in the Republican primary, even though there was no doubt that he was going to be the nominee.
Michael Franz: 2.4 million people showed up in California. On March 3 to do the same thing.
Michael Franz: In Texas, more people voted for Trump and the Republican primary than voted in. All in all, for all the Democratic candidates in the Democratic primary.
Michael Franz: And so it's it's really interesting to look at those numbers and see how that might reflect the kind of enthusiasm that Trump voters have for Trump that they're willing to turn out and vote.
Michael Franz: In a campaign that really didn't matter. And so that's, you know, that's one thing that's really important to keep in mind about this.
Michael Franz: This 2016 and 2020 comparison is that, you know, a lot of the nomination phase of a campaign is is
Michael Franz: Is amongst the Partisans that makes sense because their party nominating campaigns.
Michael Franz: But the independence either don't participate because they don't want to be part of that process, they can participate because it's a closed primary they don't want to change to a party.
Michael Franz: Or there's a lot more apathy, that might be out there in the primary phase and there would be the general election phase.
Michael Franz: And that apathy means that people just sit it out. They don't have a lot. They want to say, and so forth. Then, and they they come out in the general election.
Michael Franz: Although still 40% of voters don't vote in a typical presidential general election. So that's important to keep in mind, relative to turn out.
Michael Franz: Now, the other thing I wanted to point out the second point that was the first big point was about turnout rates in presidential
Michael Franz: Primaries. The other thing I want to point out is something that the book raises, which is how the fundamentals, really important. And we're going to talk about the fundamentals.
Michael Franz: Next week in the general election, the fundamentals here refer to the state of the economy in general conditions on the ground at the textbook calls reality, we might call fundamentals and the book mentions the this textbook MIT or this book mentions that
Michael Franz: In many ways, in the past, the effect of economic change on presidential approvals so strong that when the economy got better, the economy got worse presidents did better or did worse and approval numbers pretty predictably
Michael Franz: But that sort of started to fall apart with Obama and they point out in chapter six. They point out in
Michael Franz: Chapter two, and figure 2.5 that Obama's approval numbers did not go up or down, even as consumer sentiment attitudes about the economy.
Michael Franz: Went up or down. And so he didn't seem to get a lot of credit for that and his approval numbers. And one of the reasons they raised that is because even though fundamentals always matter.
Michael Franz: There is a weakening of those effects as polarization and partisanship takes hold, as people come to your affiliate very strongly with their party.
Michael Franz: They've already given credit to their partisans for the good things that are going and they've discounted the responsibility for the bad things, and they've done the reverse.
Michael Franz: For the other side that when economic conditions change partisan attitudes are so strong. It doesn't necessarily affect
Michael Franz: approval numbers as strongly as they used to. Now, it still affects them and if the economy isn't doing great presidential people will go down, but it's a little
Michael Franz: Harder to move those numbers in it used to be. And so I want to show you another example of that, that I used from
Michael Franz: Building off of an analysis that that sides and fabrics. The two authors of this book did for their very similar book that they wrote out to the 2012 election.
Michael Franz: And I grabbed their data. They were very gracious to share that with me and I looked at a different analysis that they did in 2012 and I tried to apply that to Trump
Michael Franz: And that's to look at Trump approval numbers over the course of his presidency as a function of a couple of key factors. So a function of a couple of
Michael Franz: Important fundamentals, as you might call them. So I take quarterly approval ratings of presidents from Harry Truman, all the way up through brock obama so from 1948 to 2016 and I use those quarters, those
Michael Franz: Many, many decades and many hundreds of quarters of data four quarters in a year to estimate the relationship between presidential approval average presidential approval and a quarter. So the average presidential approval, say from January, all the way through March.
Michael Franz: What's on average the President's approval rating from January to March in any given year, and I control for
Michael Franz: Approval in the in the proceeding quarter unemployment numbers, whether the President is got divided government or not.
Michael Franz: Certain positive or negative events that may have happened in the quarter that might benefit the president or damage the President's approval numbers and then change in GDP, which is a measure of economic growth.
Michael Franz: And if you use those things and you predict presidential approval numbers in the quarter.
Michael Franz: You can get a sense of what we are what we might call expected approval numbers you can make a prediction from that statistical model about were given the history
Michael Franz: From Truman, all the way through Obama, where should trump be given the fundamentals in the quarter given unemployment rates change in GDP previous approval and
Michael Franz: Certain events that may have benefited or dis disadvantage, the President in that past quarter and that will give us an estimate, given that model and the history of
Michael Franz: Expected when we can compare that to actual approval and we can see whether the President is therefore more or less popular than what the model would expect.
Michael Franz: And so in this case you can see for Trump's Presidential term, the actual approval numbers have been below the expected numbers. And that's partly because, well, one a lot of people hate him and he hasn't been as a result, getting
Michael Franz: The credit that he might normally get given the history for the economic growth that's been going on in the first number of years of his first term.
Michael Franz: And so expected numbers always show him above 40 well around 45 or higher into the low 50s and his actual numbers are often well below that.
Michael Franz: Now that's partly a confirmation of what the authors are talking about with Obama consumer sentiment sort of invariant, the economic factors on the ground.
Michael Franz: But then the reverse happen which is the economy tanked in the early part of 2020 around code. And so as the economy tanked.
Michael Franz: What you should see as a result of that is his approval numbers should also tank, because as the economy went south and as unemployment went up.
Michael Franz: history suggests that the President should suffer from that.
Michael Franz: But that didn't happen according to this model in fact presidential approval should be somewhere around 37% in the second half of the second quarter in the second quarter of 2020
Michael Franz: Through the end of June, but he's still hanging out somewhere at that time around 40 to 43% so a substantial non trivial higher
Michael Franz: Approval rating, then what is expected from the model. And so I think somewhat reaffirms sort of what one of the threads that the authors in this book are talking about, which is the partisanship has also kind of disrupted the tight relationship between
Michael Franz: Somewhat tight relationship that can exist between
Michael Franz: The fundamentals and presidential approval ratings and I wanted to point that out and and and and talk about that too.
Michael Franz: So those are the two things I think are really interesting. And I'd be happy to hear your comments and reactions to those. But then I want to also want to dig in to the
Michael Franz: To the many analyses that they have in these chapters about the effects of all these individual attitudes on people's voting behavior and support for Trump.
Michael Franz: So look forward to that conversation and and I hope you all have a have had a good weekend and are enjoying the fall so far and managing this early process of of remote learning. I will talk to you soon. Take care.